In this lesson we're going to look at
the first of three different types of if
statements.
We're gonna call this the simple if.
So I'm gonna use Notepad here kind of like
a white board.
So the way we form the simple if in Python
is, we write the keyword, if, followed by
a relational expression.
After the relational expression, we put a
colon.
The colon signifies that we're now ready
to start the body of the if.
The body of the if has to be indented a
couple of spaces, two or three, up to tab.
I don't like to use tab, but you can use
tab.
And then, inside the indention is where
you'll put Python statements of any type.
Of course you can also have more than one
relational expressions, you
could have RE1 followed by a logical
operator, followed by the statements.
And of course you could have RE1 or RE2,
followed by the statements.
The way the if statement works is that the
relational expression is tested.
If the relational expression is true.
Then the statements inside the body, in
other words, indented from the if, are
executed.
And they're only executed if the
relational expression is true.
So in the next two examples, the whole
statement must be true, just like with
the or, must be true in order for the
statement or statements to be executed.
And that's all there is to it.
So let's look at an example in Python.
So let's minimize that.
Bring up out window.
Clear the screen.
We'll work in Python three at this time.
We're gonna write a script for this.
We're not gonna do it interactively.
So we're gonna call this ifstatement.py.
Let me adjust it on the screen here.
Just a bit.
There we go.
All right, so to demonstrate how the if
statements
works, we're going to write a simple
payroll program.
So we'll ask the user enter the number of
hours worked.
And we'll store it in a variable
hoursWorked.
We'll assign the rate although we could
ask for the rate also,
just to make this program a little
simpler, I'll assign the rate.
Now here's where our if statement comes
in.
We would say if hours worked is greater
than 40 followed by
the colon then I drop down to the next
line and I indent.
Then I'll say, grossPay =
(40 * rate) +
plus the number of hours worked, minus 40,
times
the rate times 1.5 to represent time and a
half.
If, on the other hand, the hours worked is
less than or equal to 40, then
gross pay is equal to the hours worked
times the rate, just as simple as that.
Then we can print gross pay, and remember
to decatenate
a numeric value we have to convert it to
string.
So we'll convert it to string to display
it.
So there's our program, or script.
So let's Exit and Save.
Then we'll run our script.
So it says, Enter the hours worked.
Let's enter 45.
And then it computes the Gross Pay.
Let's run it again.
This time, lets set the hours worked to
20,
and 20 times 25 is 500, so that's correct.
So looking at the program again one more
time, we see how the if statement worked.
The program looks at this relational
expression
and decides whether it's true or false.
If it's true.
Then it executes the statement below,
otherwise it does nothing.
Then it moves down to the next
if statement, and analyzes this relational
expression.
If hoursWorked is less than or equal
to 40, then it executes this statement
instead.
It's possible that we really don't need to
have two
relational expressions tested, because
either hoursWorked is greater than 40.
Or it's less than or equal to 40.
So in that case, we want to use the second
version of the if statement called the If
Else statement.
And we're going to see how to do that in
the next lesson.